Align ping pong API with upstream changes (#705)
ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap: draft-ietf-ppm-dap.md

message structures and processing rules are specified in the following
subsections.

Each Aggregator maintains some state for each report. A state transition is
triggered by receiving a message from the Aggregator's peer. Eventually this
process results in a terminal state, either rejecting the report or recovering
an output share. Once a report has reached a terminal state, no more messages

> will be processed for it. Each state is said to have one of four possible
> "types" (see {{Section 5.7 of !VDAF}}: `Continued`, `FinishedWithOutbound`,
> `Finished` and `Rejected`. The first two types include an outbound message to
> be processed by the peer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will be processed for it. There are four possible states (see {{Section 5.7 of
!VDAF}}: `Continued`, `FinishedWithOutbound`, `Finished` and `Rejected`. The
first two states include an outbound message to be processed by the peer.
```

message structures and processing rules are specified in the following
subsections.

Each Aggregator maintains some state for each report. A state transition is

> triggered by receiving a message from the Aggregatro's peer. Eventually this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
triggered by receiving a message from the Aggregator's peer. Eventually this
```

#### Leader Initialization {#leader-init}

~~~ aasvg
                     PrepareResp
Report --> Continued -----+----> Continued
                          |
                          +----> FinishedWithOutbound
                          |
                          +----> Finished (*commit)
                          |
                          +----> Rejected (*reject)
~~~
{: #leader-init-state title="Leader state transition triggered by aggregation initialization. (\*) indicates a terminal state." }

The Leader begins an aggregation job by choosing a set of candidate reports that
belong to the same task and a job ID which MUST be unique within the task.

First, the Leader MUST ensure each report in the candidate set can be committed

> per the criteria detailed in {{batch-buckets}}. If a If a report is not cannot
> be committed, then the Leader rejects it and removes it from the candidate set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
per the criteria detailed in {{batch-buckets}}. If a report cannot be committed,
then the Leader rejects it and removes it from the candidate set.
```

#### Leader Initialization {#leader-init}

~~~ aasvg
                     PrepareResp
Report --> Continued -----+----> Continued
                          |
                          +----> FinishedWithOutbound
                          |
                          +----> Finished (*commit)
                          |
                          +----> Rejected (*reject)
~~~
{: #leader-init-state title="Leader state transition triggered by aggregation initialization. (\*) indicates a terminal state." }

The Leader begins an aggregation job by choosing a set of candidate reports that
belong to the same task and a job ID which MUST be unique within the task.

First, the Leader MUST ensure each report in the candidate set can be
committed. That is: the Leader MUST ensure it has not committed a report with
the same ID and task; and the Leader MUST ensure the batch bucket to which the
report belongs has not been collected. See {{batch-buckets}} for details. If a
report is not cannot be committed, then the Leader rejects it and removes it

> from the candidate set.

Author: Leader MUST ensure commitment won't fail. This amounts to resolving race conditions across aggregation jobs and collection jobs, both of which are already operational requirements.

#### Leader Initialization {#leader-init}

~~~ aasvg
                     PrepareResp
Report --> Continued -----+----> Continued
                          |

>                           +----> FinishedWithOutbound

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                          +----> FinishedWithOutbound (*commit)
```

Isn't `FinishedWithOutbound` terminal? Sure, you send a message to the peer, but the aggregator that reaches this state doesn't expect to receive any further message.

Author: Not for the Leader! It's still possible for the Helper to reject at this point. The Helper always commits first.

                          |
                          +----> Finished (*commit)
                          |
                          +----> Rejected (*reject)
~~~
{: #leader-init-state title="Leader state transition triggered by aggregation initialization. (\*) indicates a terminal state." }

The Leader begins an aggregation job by choosing a set of candidate reports that
belong to the same task and a job ID which MUST be unique within the task.

> First, the Leader MUST ensure each report in the candidate set can be
> committed. That is: the Leader MUST ensure it has not committed a report with
> the same ID and task; and the Leader MUST ensure the batch bucket to which the
> report belongs has not been collected. See {{batch-buckets}} for details. If a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, the Leader MUST ensure each report in the candidate set can be
committed per the criteria detailed in {{batch-buckets}}. If a
```

I buy that we need to do these checks at job scheduling time rather than at output share commitment. However I'd prefer not to re-state the criteria here as we describe them carefully in {#batch-buckets} already. Also, I think we should consider tweaking the text there given that the leader now wants to use it slightly differently. Currently, in {#batch-buckets}, we have:

```
Aggregators MUST check the following conditions before committing an output
share:

* If the batch bucket has been collected, the Aggregator MUST mark the report
  invalid with error `batch_collected`.
* If the report ID associated with `out_share` has been aggregated in the task,
  the Aggregator MUST mark the report invalid with error `report_replayed`.

Aggregators may perform these checks at any time before commitment (i.e., during
either aggregation initialization or continuation).
```

I think maybe we should take these lines and break them out into their own section so that this text right here can point at that, without the description of how to commit an output share to a batch bucket. Maybe a sub-section within {#batch-buckets} like `##### Commitment eligibility`? Or do you think it's clear enough if we point to all of {#batch-buckets} that these are the only fallible checks in there?

Further, the last sentence about doing the checks at anytime is no longer true for the Leader, right? It now has to do it when constructing the candidate set. So it could say:

```
Helpers may perform these checks at any time before commitment (i.e., during
either aggregation initialization or continuation). Leaders MUST perform these
checks before adding a report to an aggregation job.
```

Author: > I buy that we need to do these checks at job scheduling time rather than at output share commitment. However I'd prefer not to re-state the criteria here as we describe them carefully in {#batch-buckets} already.

Good idea, done. Regarding changes to {{batch-buckets}}:

> I think maybe we should take these lines and break them out into their own section so that this text right here can point at that, without the description of how to commit an output share to a batch bucket. Maybe a sub-section within {#batch-buckets} like `##### Commitment eligibility`? Or do you think it's clear enough if we point to all of {#batch-buckets} that these are the only fallible checks in there?

I wouldn't want to add another sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-section and have to define "commitment eligiibility" :)

I word-smithed the section a bit to make it more clear, let me know what you think

>
> Further, the last sentence about doing the checks at anytime is no longer true for the Leader, right? It now has to do it when constructing the candidate set. So it could say:
> 
> ```
> Helpers may perform these checks at any time before commitment (i.e., during
> either aggregation initialization or continuation). Leaders MUST perform these
> checks before adding a report to an aggregation job.
> ```

Good catch, added your text verbatim.

  * `report_share.encrypted_input_share`: The Helper's encrypted input share.

  * `payload`: The `outbound` message computed by the previous step.

It is not possible for `state` to be of type `Finished` during Leader

> initialization.

Author: Already implied by text added above

   * `task_id` is the task ID
   * `agg_param` is the VDAF aggregation parameter provided by the Collector
     (see {{collect-flow}})

>    * `inbound` is the payload of the `PrepareResp`
>    * `state` is the report's initial prep state

Reviewer: nit: match the order of the function arguments
```suggestion
   * `state` is the report's initial prep state
   * `inbound` is the payload of the `PrepareResp`
```

   If the new `state` has type `Continued` or `FinishedWithOutbound`,
   then there is at least one more outbound message to send before preparation
   is complete. The Leader stores `state` and proceeds as in
   {{aggregation-leader-continuation}}.

>    Else if the new  `state` has type `Finished`, then preparation is complete
>    and the state includes an output share, denoted `state.out_share`. The
>    Leader commits to `state.out_share` as described in {{batch-buckets}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Else if the new `state` has type `Finished`, then preparation is complete and
   the state includes an output share, denoted `state.out_share`. The Leader
   commits to `state.out_share` as described in {{batch-buckets}}.
```

   * `task_id` is the task ID
   * `agg_param` is the VDAF aggregation parameter provided by the Collector
     (see {{collect-flow}})
   * `prev_state` is the state computed earlier by calling

>      `Vdaf.ping_pong_leader_init` or `Vdaf.ping_pong_leader_continued`

Author: Consistency: Elsewhere we write `state = Vdaf.ping_pong(state)` rather than `state = Vdaf.ping_pong(prev_state)`

Reviewer: I don't mind renaming it from `prev_state`, but we should still describe the `state` value input to `Vdaf.ping_pong_leader_continued`

Author: Done.

   * `inbound` is the message in the `PrepareResp`

   If `outbound != None`, then the Leader stores `state` and `outbound` and
   proceeds to {{aggregation-leader-continuation}}. If `outbound == None`, then
   the preparation process is complete: either `state == Rejected()`, in which
   case the Leader rejects the report and removes it from the candidate set; or
   `state == Finished(out_share)`, in which case preparation is complete and the
   Leader commits `out_share` as described in {{batch-buckets}}. If commitment
   fails, then the Leader rejects the report and removes it from the candidate

>    set.

Author: Rejection does nothing because the Helper has already committed. This will always result in a batch mismatch, unless the Leader has already ensured that the report was not replayed and the bucket was not collected.

} PrepareResp;
~~~

> Next the Helper decrypts each of its remaining report shares as described in

Author: This is the first step of computing `AggregationJobResp`, not an intermediate step.

} PrepareResp;
~~~

Otherwise `state` has type `Continued` or `FinishedWithOutbound` and
there is at least one more outbound message to process. (State `Finished` is
not reachable at this point.) The Helper responds with

~~~ tls-presentation
variant {
  ReportID report_id;
  PrepareRespType prepare_resp_type = continue;
  opaque payload<0..2^32-1> = state.outbound;
} PrepareResp;
~~~

If `state` has type `Continued`, then the Helper stores `state`
for use in the first continuation step in
({{aggregation-helper-continuation}}).

Else if `state` has type `FinishedWithOutbound`, then the Helper commits to
`state.out_share` as described in {{batch-buckets}}. If commitment fails with
some `ReportError` (e.g., the report was replayed or its batch bucket was
collected), then instead of the `continue` response above, the Helper responds

> with

Author: @tgeoghegan in a later PR it would be good to avoid

> then instead of the [...] response above, the Helper responds with

Ideally the text matches chronologically what we would do in the code.

} PrepareResp;
~~~

Otherwise `state` has type `Continued` or `FinishedWithOutbound` and

> there is at least one more outbound message to process. (State `Finished` is
> not reachable at this point.) The Helper responds with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
there is at least one more outbound message to process. State `Finished` is
not reachable at this point. The Helper responds with
```

~~~ tls-presentation
variant {
  ReportID report_id;
  PrepareRespType prepare_resp_type = continue;
  opaque payload<1..2^32-1> = state.outbound;
} PrepareResp;
~~~

If `state` has type `Continued`, then the Helper stores `state`
for use in the first continuation step in

> ({{aggregation-helper-continuation}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{aggregation-helper-continuation}}.
```

Otherwise, the Leader proceeds as follows with each report:

1. If the inbound prep response type is "continue" and `state` is
   `Continued(prep_state)`, then the Leader computes
1. If `state` has type `Continued` and the inbound `PrepareResp` has
   type "continue", then the Leader computes

   ~~~ pseudocode
   (state, outbound) = Vdaf.ping_pong_leader_continued(
   state = Vdaf.ping_pong_leader_continued(
       "dap-15" || task_id,
       agg_param,
       state,
       inbound,
   )
   ~~~

   where `task_id` is the task ID and `inbound` is the message payload. If
   `outbound != None`, then the Leader stores `state` and `outbound` and
   proceeds to another continuation step. If `outbound == None`, then the
   preparation process is complete: either `state == Rejected()`, in which case
   the Leader rejects the report and removes it from the candidate set or
   `state == Finished(out_share)`, in which case the Leader commits to
   `out_share` as described in {{batch-buckets}}. If commitment fails, then the

>    Leader rejects the report and removes it from the candidate set.

Author: Here again, I believe rejection has no affect and that a batch mismatch is unavoidable ... unless the Leader prevents it by being careful about how it chooses candidate sets.

   where `task_id` is the task ID and `inbound` is the payload of the inbound `PrepareResp`.
   It then processes the next state transition:

   * If the type of the new `state` is `Continued` or
     `FinishedWithOutbound`, then the Leader stores `state` and proceeds
     to the next continuation step.

1. Else if the type is "finish" and `state == Finished(out_share)`, then
   preparation is complete and the Leader stores the output share for use in

>    the collection interaction ({{collect-flow}}).

Author: @tgeoghegan we missed a "stores the output share" -> "commits the output share" here.

Reviewer: Glad you spotted it

* The number of reports included in the batch bucket.
* A 32-byte checksum value, as defined below.

An output share is eligible to be committed if the following conditions are met:

* If the batch bucket has been collected, the Aggregator MUST mark the report
  invalid with error `batch_collected`.
* If the report ID associated with `out_share` has been aggregated in the task,
  the Aggregator MUST mark the report invalid with error `report_replayed`.

> Aggregators MUST check the following conditions before committing an output
> share. Helpers may perform these checks at any time before commitment (i.e.,
> during either aggregation initialization or continuation), but Leaders MUST
> perform these checks before adding a report to an aggregation job.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aggregators MUST check these conditions before committing an output share.
Helpers may perform these checks at any time before commitment (i.e., during
either aggregation initialization or continuation), but Leaders MUST perform
these checks before adding a report to an aggregation job.
```
